

=== Schools ===
Ludhiana has 363 senior secondary, 367 high, 324 middle, 1129 primary, and pre-primary recognised Schools, with a total of 398,770 students. Most of these schools are either run by the Central Board of Secondary Education or by Punjab School Education Board.


=== Agriculture ===
Ludhiana is home to the largest agricultural university in Asia and one of the largest in the world, Punjab Agricultural University. The College of Veterinary Sciences at PAU was recently upgraded to the Guru Angad Dev Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (GADVASU).
GADVASU was established at Ludhiana by an act of the Punjab Legislature No. 16 of 2005 notified in the Punjab Government Gazette on August 9, 2005 and it started functioning w.e.f. April 21, 2006 for promoting livestock production, health and prevention of the disease(s) through integrated teaching, research and extension programme(s).


=== Medical ===

Christian Medical College, Ludhiana, the first medical school for women in Asia, was founded by Dr Dame Edith Mary Brown in 1894. Christian Medical College is a major and reputed tertiary care hospital in India where the world's first face transplant was done. Dayanand Medical College and Hospital is a tertiary care teaching hospital in Ludhiana. This institution is recognized by the Medical Council of India. The college is affiliated to Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Punjab. Guru Teg Bahadur Institute of Nursing, Ludhiana was established in the year 1997, Guru Teg Bahadur Institute of Nursing, Ludhiana is affiliated to Baba Farid University of Health Sciences (BFUHS) Faridkot.


=== Engineering ===

Guru Nanak Dev Engineering College is an institution offering facilities and education for engineering students. It has a research and development centre for bicycles and sewing machines. There is also the Research & Development Polytechnic College. There are also other institutes catering to local and surrounding areas such as Institute of Banking Services (IBS).


=== Management ===
Ludhiana has many management colleges providing courses such as Bachelor of Business Administration (BBA), Hospitality and Management (HM), Airlines Tourism and Hospitality Management (ATHM), Bachelor of Computer Applications (BCA), and Bachelor of Commerce (B.Com).
There are a few good colleges providing these courses both part-time as well as full-time, such as University Business School (UBS), Panjab University Regional Centre, the Punjab College of Technical Education (PCTE), Synetic Business School (SBS) Punjab Agricultural University (PAU), Sri Aurobindo College of Commerce and Management (SACCM) and Government college for boys and Government college for girls. Khalsa College and Arya college are also present to study as a part-time student.
SCD Govt College - SCD Govt College earlier known as SD college was renamed in 1976 after the name of great scientist and physicist Satish Chandra Dhawan. Mr Dhawan was the mentor of India's most favourite president Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam. SCD is situated at the College Road near Nehru Rose garden. SCD college is considered as the top most college of Panjab University and one of the top colleges of north India. It offered academic courses on graduate and post graduate level.


