Airways
Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi Airport has scheduled commercial flights to Delhi, Mumbai  Kolkata,Bangalore and other cities of India. The nearest International Airport is the Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport in Lucknow, which is around 77.1 km from Kanpur.
Railways

Kanpur Central is a major railhead and is among the busiest railway stations in the country. Rail routes connect it to all major cities in the state and the country. It is an A-1 category railway station coming under the Allahabad railway division of North Central Railway zone of Indian Railways. Around 300 trains pass through the station daily. Other major railway stations serving the city include Kanpur Anwarganj,Govindpuri, Panki ,Kalyanpur, Rawatpur, Chandari, Kanpur Bridge and Chakeri.
Roadways
The city has had chronic problems with maintaining local roads. There are several important National Highways that pass through Kanpur.

The UPSRTC   Inter State Bus Station (ISBT) of Kanpur officially named as the "Shaheed Major Salman Khan Bus Station". It is locally known as the "Jhakarkati Bus Station". It provides buses to important cities of India. Other UPSRTC controlled Important Bus stations are Chunniganj Bus Stand for Farrukhabad,Bareilly and Uttranchal routes ,Naubasta Bus Stand for Hamirpur route , Fazalganj is another hub for Private carriers .
Ring road
In 2011 it was reported by The Indian Express that "The National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) is all set to develop a four-lane outer ring road along the periphery of Kanpur with an aim to prevent traffic congestion in the industrial city caused by long-distance heavy vehicles. The new road, which will help the heavy vehicles to bypass the city, will be developed on Built, Operate and Transfer (BOT) basis under the phase-VII of National Highways Development Programme (NHDP)"Kanpur Metro
Kanpur Metro is an under construction rail based mass transit system in the city of Kanpur, India which shall further be extendable to Kanpur metropolitan area. The work of the first metro depot is 70 percent complete.


