Pavagadh Jain Temple:The temples of Jainism at Pavagadh are  noteworthy. They fall into three different groups: The first consists of the Bhavanaderi temples near the Naqqarkhana gate called the Navalakka temples, the second group is in honor of the Tirthankaras Suparshvanatha and Chandraprabhu and the third group, situated on the south east of Pavagadh Hill (Mataji's cliff), is near the Pārśva temple next to the Dudhia tank. On the basis of their "stylistic and architectural features", the date of construction of these temples is deduced to be the 14th–15th centuries. The temple is made up of pure white stone with elaborately carved seated and standing images of the Jain pantheon are seen on the outer walls of the temples. The temple also has a 30 ft. tall statue of God Bahubali stands tall in its vicinity.
Kalikamata Temple, a famous Hindu pilgrim centre, is located at Pavagadh. Situated amid dense forest cover on a cliff, the temple is believed to be one of the 51 Shakti Peeths. Maa Mahakalika Udan Khotala ( A Passenger Ropeway ) is operating since 1986 and takes you quickly and comfortably from Manchi to the hill top near the Maha Kalika Temple in about 6 minutes, whereas, the steep climb on foot takes over one hour. The temple of Kali is at the height of 550 metres (1,523 feet). A rope-way facility has been made available(commissioned in 1986 )  to the tourists to reach the temple. About 250 steps have to be climbed from there.
The remains of the Raval Palace still exist at Machi. There are rest houses, holiday homes and small hotels at Machi.
Then comes Teliya Talav and Dudhia Talav.
There are numerous tales, songs and dramas knitting the story of Patai Raval.
Dhaba Dungri is also a famous Shiva Temple located on the way from Halol to Pavagadh. It is also known as "Tapobhumi" of Maharshi Vishwamitra.
"Virasat Van" is also a beautiful garden located at footstep of Pavagadh.
Must Visit places also includes "Vada Talav" & "Kabooter Khana" located at footstep of Pavagadh.


